New RFC Process (#218)
buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-rfc-process.md

**Technical Oversight Committee**: The governing body responsible for overseeing the project as described in our governance document.

**Team**: A group responsible for a particular area of the project.

**Team Lead**: A team maintainer with special responsibilities for representing the concerns of a team to the project, including casting binding votes on project RFCs.

**RFC**: A document proposing a substantive change to the project as described in this document.

**Project RFC**: An RFC with cross-cutting implications, requiring collaboration between multiple teams or affecting multiple personas.

**Team RFC**: An RFC with narrower implication in comparison to a project RFC, with work scoped to a single team and implications for a narrower set of personas.

**Author**: The author or authors of an RFC are responsible for producing the draft RFC and updating it to incorporate feedback. Changes should not be made to a draft RFC without the author's consent.

**Steward**: The steward of an RFC is responsible for shepherding an RFC through the process, including working with the author to ensure RFC completeness and quality, and building consensus among stakeholders.

> **Call for Votes**: When an RFC is deemed ready by a team lead, that team lead initiates the voting process with a call for votes. At this point the RFC is closed to modification.

Reviewer: Should this be the "team lead" or the "Steward"?

Reviewer 2: I like steward... made suggestion

> **Call for Votes**: When an RFC is deemed ready by a team lead, that team lead initiates the voting process with a call for votes. At this point the RFC is closed to modification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Call for Votes**: When an RFC is deemed ready by its steward, the steward initiates the voting process with a call for votes. At this point the RFC is closed to modification.
```

* the TOC requests that it be a project RFC.

Given the nature of our project many RFCs will happen at the project level. However, some types of changes are more appropriately scoped to the team level. Some examples include:
* Platform example: additions to or modification of the pack CLI interface (e.g. [pack pull policy](0046-pack-pull-policy.md)) or library interface (e.g. [pack logging refactor](0002-pack-logging-refactor.md)).
* BAT example: a new major version of the libcnb API.
* Implementation example: [Layer history](0102-history.md) or the lifecycle [multicall binary](0024-lifecycle-multicall-binary-for-build.md).
* Distribution example: [Update CNB Registry JSON Schema](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/45).
* Learning example: [intro video](0090-intro-video-script.md).

### Process

#### Requesting an RFC
If you believe an RFC should be written but are either not prepared to author it personally or not prepared to do it _now_, please open an issue on this repo with a high level description of the desired change. This helps us keep track of good ideas and match make ambitious contributors with appropriately sized challenges.

#### Drafting an RFC

> All RFCs begin life as a draft. Anyone wishing to propose a change to the project should create a draft RFC by:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All RFCs begin life as a pull request. Anyone wishing to propose a change to the project should create a draft RFC by:
```

#### Stewardship

The steward and their team should:
 * work with the author of the RFC to ensure that the RFC is complete and implementable contingent upon approval. This can happen synchronously at team working groups or asynchronously via github and slack.
 * raise visibility to and solicit feedback from other stakeholders including the TOC, other teams, and the community at large. This can happen synchronously at the project working group and asynchronously via github and slack.
 * drive consensus for the RFC by incorporating feedback from stakeholders so that the RFC has the best possible chance of approval during the voting process.
 * ensure there is a plan in place to implement the RFC in a reasonable time frame, contingent upon approval. The team itself need not implement the RFC but we should not approve RFCs for which we have no concrete plan to implement.
 * in the case of complicated or risky RFCs, a POC should be developed at this stage to validate and de-risk the proposed design.

#### Voting

Ideally the voting should be a formality and not a moment to discover new disagreement, consensus already haven been driven by the steward.

> When the steward deems the RFC ready and likely to be accepted they should formally call for votes and set an end date for voting. This process does not prescribe a length for the voting window, but stewards should make a good faith effort to ensure that all interested parties, and in particular those with binding votes, have adequate opportunity to review the finalized RFC and cast votes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the steward deems the RFC ready and likely to be accepted they should formally call for votes and set an end date for voting. Stewards should make a good faith effort to ensure that all interested parties, and in particular those with binding votes, have adequate opportunity to review the finalized RFC and cast votes. A minimum time period of a week (unless all of the binding votes are cast) is a good guideline.
```

The RFC may not be edited during the voting window.

For project RFCs, all TOC members and all team leads are given a binding vote.

Additionally, for team RFCs, all team maintainers are given a binding vote.

> Votes are cast via reviews on the RFC PR. Accepting the PR signifies a yes vote while a request for changes signifies a no vote. If all members with a binding vote vote in the affirmative, the voting window may close early.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Votes are cast via reviews on the RFC PR. Accepting the PR signifies a yes vote while a request for changes signifies a no vote. If all members with a binding vote vote in the affirmative, the voting window may close early. In order for a RFC to be approved, at least 1 yes vote. In the rare case there are no votes, the Calling for Votes process may be followed again or the RFC may be closed.
```

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

### Labels

| name                      | purpose
|---------------------------|--------
| `type/idea`               | An Issues requesting an RFC
| `type/rfc`                | A PR containing a new RFC
| `type/tracking`           | An issue tracking the implementation of an RFC
| `type/ammendment`         | A PR containing an ammendment to an existing RFC
| `scope/project`           | Applied to project-level RFCs
| `scope/team`              | Applied to team-level RFCs.
| `team/<team name>`        | E.g `team/platform`. Designates the team that "owns" an RFC. Applies to both team-level and project-level RFCs. For project-level RFCs the lead of this team is the steward.
| `status/needs-steward`    | Applied to all new RFCs. Removed once the RFC is accepted by a steward or closed.
| `status/ready-for-review` | The Steward applies this to an RFC when they deem it ready for review by a broader audience.

> | `status/voting`           | The Steward applies this label when the voting window opens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `status/voting`           | The Steward applies this label when the voting window opens
| `status/steward-assigned`           | The Steward applies this label when adopting the RFC along with self-assigning the PR
```

Reviewer 2: To go with my comment here: https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/218/files#r972075364

| `status/accepted`         | The Steward applies this label to accepted RFCs.
| `status/rejected`         | The Steward applies this label to rejected RFCs.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The `Final Comment Period` label will be removed.
```

The RFC may not be edited during the voting window.

For project RFCs, all TOC members and all team leads are given a binding vote.

Additionally, for team RFCs, all team maintainers are given a binding vote.

Votes are cast via reviews on the RFC PR. Accepting the PR signifies a yes vote while a request for changes signifies a no vote. If all members with a binding vote vote in the affirmative, the voting window may close early.

##### Acceptance

If the end date of the vote arrives without a no vote from a member with binding vote, the RFC is accepted. It will be merged into the repo and assigned a number. The steward should create a tracking issue to coordinate implementation and link the tracking issue in the RFC header. When this is complete, implementation can begin.

##### Rejection

If a single no vote from a member with binding vote is cast before the arrival of the end date the RFC is immediately rejected and the PR should be closed.

The same RFC may be re-opened and brought to a vote again in the future assuming the concerns that lead to the no vote are addressed.

> ##### Implementation

Reviewer 3: Minor: It seems like this header is either a) of the wrong level or b) empty.

Reviewer 3: @ekcasey any comment on this?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
##### Implementation

After the RFC has been accepted, any team or individual may begin implementing the changes it defines. 
```

##### Amending an RFC

While we should strive to get the details right the first time, by doing our due diligence including a proof of concept implementation for larger/riskier RFCs, there will be times when we discover during the process of implementation that something about the original plan was incomplete or needs adjustment. Small changes may be PR'ed by the implementer and merged upon approval by the steward. It is the responsibility of the Steward to determine what changes are minor enough to qualify as an amendment and which are fundamental and/or controversial enough to require a new superseding RFC.

PRs that amend an RFC should add an amendment to the [History](../0000-template.md#history) section of the RFC document with:
1. Amendment Metadata
2. A summary of the changes
3. The motivation for the changes

### Amending the RFC Process

> The RFC process should be amended through the RFC process. However, the TOC reserves the right to change the process via a super-majority vote in the unlikely even that the process prove so irreparably flawed as to preclude its amendment via the process.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The RFC process should be amended through the RFC process. However, the TOC reserves the right to change the process via a super-majority vote in the unlikely even that the process proves so irreparably flawed as to preclude its amendment via the process.
```

| `type/ammendment`         | A PR containing an ammendment to an existing RFC
| `scope/project`           | Applied to project-level RFCs
| `scope/team`              | Applied to team-level RFCs.
| `team/<team name>`        | E.g `team/platform`. Designates the team that "owns" an RFC. Applies to both team-level and project-level RFCs. For project-level RFCs the lead of this team is the steward.
| `status/needs-steward`    | Applied to all new RFCs. Removed once the RFC is accepted by a steward or closed.
| `status/ready-for-review` | The Steward applies this to an RFC when they deem it ready for review by a broader audience.
| `status/voting`           | The Steward applies this label when the voting window opens
| `status/accepted`         | The Steward applies this label to accepted RFCs.
| `status/rejected`         | The Steward applies this label to rejected RFCs.

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

This RFC should be accepted via the existing RFC process. The new process will take effect immediately after its ratification, superseding in its entirety the previous process.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> None

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Lazy consensus favors velocity and moving things forward, over rigor and thoroughness. This could result in a higher volume of changes that have some unforeseen consequences. This is a tradeoff we are consciously making.
```

# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: RFC Process
- Start Date: 2021-05-10
- Author(s): [@ekcasey](https://github.com/ekcasey)
- Status: Draft <!-- Acceptable values: Draft, Approved, On Hold, Superseded -->
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: [RFC 0004](0004-rfc-process.md)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> The "RFC" (request for comments) process provide a consistent and controlled path for new features and other substantive changes to enter the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "RFC" (request for comments) process provides a consistent and controlled path for new features and other substantive changes to enter the project.
```

**Project RFC**: An RFC with cross-cutting implications, requiring collaboration between multiple teams or affecting multiple personas.

**Team RFC**: An RFC with narrower implication in comparison to a project RFC, with work scoped to a single team and implications for a narrower set of personas.

**Author**: The author or authors of an RFC are responsible for producing the draft RFC and updating it to incorporate feedback. Changes should not be made to a draft RFC without the author's consent.

**Steward**: The steward of an RFC is responsible for shepherding an RFC through the process, including working with the author to ensure RFC completeness and quality, and building consensus among stakeholders.

**Call for Votes**: When an RFC is deemed ready by a team lead, that team lead initiates the voting process with a call for votes. At this point the RFC is closed to modification.

**End Date**: When a call for votes is initiated, an end date for voting is set. Any person wishing to vote on an RFC must do so by the end date.

**Voting Window**: The time period between a call for votes and the voting end date is referred to as the voting window.

> **Lazy Consensus**: Voting on project level RFCs is done by lazy consensus. Any project member with a binding vote who has not voted by the end date is assumed to assent to the RFC.

Reviewer 4: project level only? or is this for team level too?

Reviewer 3: Although I like the idea of team level autonomy, consistency would make it easier as team members and contributors move about different segments of the project.

My vote is that this applies to team-level RFCs as well.

> **Lazy Consensus**: Voting on project level RFCs is done by lazy consensus. Any project member with a binding vote who has not voted by the end date is assumed to assent to the RFC.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Lazy Consensus**: Voting on RFCs is done by lazy consensus. Any project member with a binding vote who has not voted by the end date is assumed to assent to the RFC.
```

[motivation]: #motivation

This RFC process is an evolution of our [previous process](0004-rfc-process.md).

As the project grows our process needs to grow with it. Compared to the previous iteration, this new process should:
1. **Re-balance responsibilities**. We wish to empower team leads to take ownership of the future of the project and transition the TOC into an oversight role.
2. **Favor action**. By moving from a super-majority vote to a lazy-consensus we remove the ability to block change through inaction. It is now the responsibility of those with concerns to raise them in a timely fashion.
3. **Manage our bandwidth**. Sometimes we need to say "not now" to a good idea to manage the number of large changes proceeding simultaneously. This new process should help the project focus on shipping high-quality enhancements by managing the number of in-flight RFCs, and ensuring each approved RFC has an implementer.
4. **Improve Readability**. By allowing amendments to RFCs we make life easier for anyone wishing to understand a change by ensuring they can find the full plan in a single document.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

### What Types of Changes Require an RFC?

> Any "substantive" change to the project requires an RFC. substantive includes but is not limited to:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Any "substantive" change to the project should require an RFC. substantive includes but is not limited to:
```

* changes to the specification.
* the adoption, creation, or deprecation of a component (e.g. a new platform implementation, a new shared library, a new system buildpack). 

> * new features (e.g. a new pack command, a new flag on an existing pack command, an addition to the buildpack API)

Reviewer 5: Should new pack flags have an RFC? @jromero thoughts?

Reviewer 3: I'm okay with that statement given that at minimum new flags do require a bit of thought. We could ask for that information in an issue, but an RFC would encompass the same amount of detail necessary.

> * any major refactor that affects consumers of our libraries or materially impacts contribution.

Reviewer 5: We typically haven't followed this. Is this something we really want/need?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0082-pack-package-refactor.md is one example but I recall at the time we thought it might have been better as a sub-team RFC.

Reviewer 3: I would have expected ["pack package refactor"](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0082-pack-package-refactor.md) to be a sub-team RFC if we were practicing them at that time.

> * any major refactor that affects consumers of our libraries or materially impacts contribution.

"major" feels subjective to me. I would rather want to see maintainers and leads make a judgement call on what, if any, refactors should be RFCs.

Reviewer 3: From 9/1 working group:

* "major" is intentionally subjective to allow maintainers and leads to make that judgment call.

* any major re-architecture especially if it has noteworthy implications for security or performance.
* introduction of new processes or changes to our existing processes including the RFC process.

> If there is any doubt, maintainers should prefer opening an "unecessary" RFC to surprising users was unexpectedly impactful changes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If there is any doubt, maintainers should prefer opening an "unnecessary" RFC to surprising users was unexpectedly impactful changes.
```

scare quotes are scary :P

- Fork the RFC repo: <https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs>
- Copy `0000-template.md` to `text/0000-my-feature.md` (where 'my-feature' is descriptive. don't assign an RFC number yet).
- Fill in RFC. Any section can be marked as "N/A" if not applicable.
- Submit a pull request.

#### Finding a Steward
All RFCs, even project RFCs "belong" to a team. For project RFCs, The team lead of the responsible team is the steward of the RFC. For team RFCs any maintainer may be the steward. The author and the steward of an RFC may, at times, be the same person.

In many but not all cases the appropriate team to own an RFC will be obvious. When the appropriate team is not obvious, the author should work with the community to find a home within one of the teams. Factors to consider when finding home include:
* Which team has the most relevant technical context?
* Which team has the deepest understanding of the use-case and the needs of impacted personas?
* Which team is responsible for the components most impacted by the proposed change?
* Which team is enthusiastic about supporting the change?

> If a home cannot be found for a draft RFC it remains in draft until one can be found. This does not necessary mean that the RFC is not a good idea or isn't something the project will take up eventually. It may simply be that the project does not have the bandwidth to prioritize this particular change at this particular time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a home cannot be found for a draft RFC it remains in draft until one can be found. This does not necessarily mean that the RFC is not a good idea or isn't something the project will take up eventually. It may simply be that the project does not have the bandwidth to prioritize this particular change at this particular time.
```

#### Stewardship

The steward and their team should:
 * work with the author of the RFC to ensure that the RFC is complete and implementable contingent upon approval. This can happen synchronously at team working groups or asynchronously via github and slack.
 * raise visibility to and solicit feedback from other stakeholders including the TOC, other teams, and the community at large. This can happen synchronously at the project working group and asynchronously via github and slack.
 * drive consensus for the RFC by incorporating feedback from stakeholders so that the RFC has the best possible chance of approval during the voting process.
 * ensure there is a plan in place to implement the RFC in a reasonable time frame, contingent upon approval. The team itself need not implement the RFC but we should not approve RFCs for which we have no concrete plan to implement.
 * in the case of complicated or risky RFCs, a POC should be developed at this stage to validate and de-risk the proposed design.

#### Voting

Ideally the voting should be a formality and not a moment to discover new disagreement, consensus already haven been driven by the steward.

> When the steward deems the RFC ready and likely to be accepted they should formally call for votes and set an end date for voting. This process does not prescribe a length for the voting window, but stewards should make a good faith effort to ensure that all interested parties, and in particular those with binding votes, have adequate opportunity to review the finalized RFC and cast votes.

Reviewer 5: Can we set a minimum time period of a week for RFCs unless all of the binding votes are cast? We should also get rid of FCP and replace it with this voting period.

The RFC may not be edited during the voting window.

For project RFCs, all TOC members and all team leads are given a binding vote.

> For team RFCs, all team maintainers are given a binding vote.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Additionally, for team RFCs, all team maintainers are given a binding vote.
```

Votes are cast via reviews on the RFC PR. Accepting the PR signifies a yes vote while a request for changes signifies a no vote. If all members with a binding vote vote in the affirmative, the voting window may close early.

##### Acceptance

If the end date of the vote arrives without a no vote from a member with binding vote, the RFC is accepted. It will be merged into the repo and assigned a number. The steward should create a tracking issue to coordinate implementation and link the tracking issue in the RFC header. When this is complete, implementation can begin.

##### Rejection

> If a single no vote is cast before the arrival of the end date the RFC is immediately rejected and the PR should be closed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If a single no vote from a member with binding vote is cast before the arrival of the end date the RFC is immediately rejected and the PR should be closed.
```

| `type/ammendment`         | A PR containing an ammendment to an existing RFC
| `scope/project`           | Applied to project-level RFCs
| `scope/team`              | Applied to team-level RFCs.
| `team/<team name>`        | E.g `team/platform`. Designates the team that "owns" an RFC. Applies to both team-level and project-level RFCs. For project-level RFCs the lead of this team is the steward.
| `status/needs-steward`    | Applied to all new RFCs. Removed once the RFC is accepted by a steward or closed.
| `status/ready-for-review` | The Steward applies this to an RFC when they deem it ready for review by a broader audience.
| `status/voting`           | The Steward applies this label when the voting window opens
| `status/accepted`         | The Steward applies this label to accepted RFCs.
| `status/rejected`         | The Steard applies this label to a rejected RFCs.

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

This RFC should be accepted via the existing RFC process. The new process will take effect immediately after its ratification, superseding in its entirety the previous process.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> Why should we *not* do this?
> 
> TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
None
```

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> - What other designs have been considered?
> - Why is this proposal the best?
> - What is the impact of not doing this?
> 
> TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
None
```

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

TODO

> * Borrows heavily from TEP and KEP processes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Tekton Enhancement Proposal Process (TEP)](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0001-tekton-enhancement-proposal-process.md)
* [Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals (KEP)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/README.md)
```

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> 
> TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

None
```
